Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Walter Sheer. He is Dennis Odori
legit, professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the
University of Notre Dame. And today we're talking about
his book, a History of Fake Things on the
internet. So, Doctor Shar, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Great. Thank you so much for inviting me.
So tell us first, uh particularly as a professor
of Computer Science and Engineering, what motivated you to
write such a book and what is basically its
main premise?
Yeah. So this is a great question is it's
kind of an unusual thing for a computer science
professor who's typically writing code and writing, you know,
uh scientific papers to jump in and write a
book. Um THAT'S kind of targeted at a public
facing audience and a book that's really like a
history of technology. Um For many years in my
sort of more traditional research I had been looking
at uh an area called media forensics within uh
computer science and electrical engineering. Um This, this is
kind of a research area that is trying to
understand how one can detect manipulated digital images and
videos, how one can detect synthesized uh content, right?
That's coming from generative A I now um and
and other types of synthetic content. Um And what
what's interesting about this is like it has a
big social component, right? Is like who's creating that,
that content, right? Should we be worried about it?
There's a political uh component to it. And also
I kind of felt there was an unappreciated history
uh for this and a lot of people on
the technical side of things weren't thinking very deeply
about the nature of this content. Uh You know,
it's like where did the tools come from? Why
did people create these tools? Um What does the
content look like on the internet? There's a lot
of what the field had been doing was looking
at um kind of can data, data created for
experiments in the laboratory, not real examples. Uh And
there were a lot of stories circulating which I
suspected were actually fake in and of themselves, right
between researchers about things that had supposedly happened. Um
So I felt especially given the the political climate.
Um YOU know, so this of course, is going
back to like um uh 2020 1820 19 when
I started to think about um this, this project,
right? And all of the the sort of political
polarization on the internet. Uh And this, this now
sort of pervasive paranoia about fake things. I thought,
you know, it's worth jumping and writing, you know,
a history of this. Um, BECAUSE again, I thought
there was a more interesting story than just that
political story. And if you looked at, you know,
the popular, uh, reporting on this and in that
period, up to the present, right, again, it's all
of this sort of like political alarmism but, but
I feel like the internet's a much larger place
and there, there's more going on there. Um And
so that kind of set me out on my
journey uh to dig into this.
Great. So, uh and a very interesting thing that
you also talk about in the book sort of
briefly is you not only talk about the history
of fake is on the internet, but you also
take a step back and talk about the more
general history of fakery. So would you like to
tell us a little bit about that? And why
do you think it's also important to mention that
for them people to understand uh sort of the
history of fake things on the internet itself?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So with this particular topic, you
can't just arbitrarily say, like I will start researching
it at the point at which the internet becomes
a thing. Um There's a much richer history of
uh storytelling in humanity. And so in the book,
I go all the way back to antiquity, in
fact, to talk about um the role of fiction,
like, why, why do people create stories? Why do
we tell each other these stories? How do those
stories evolve over time? Um What, what is the
role of fiction in society? Like all of those
things are really key to humanity? And that's a
really important piece of the internet story, but you
have to go way back um to, to try
to understand that. And so again, the book looks
at uh early instances of fake news, Herodotus, right?
Um IN, in his histories, um uh recounts these
fantastic stories, things that can't possibly be true. Uh
For instance, uh he reports that there are giant
ants in Persia that mine gold. It's like, OK,
but like, you know, it's, it's like an obviously
fake story, but there's an interesting reason why people
in antiquity were telling these stories, um why they
were filtering a lot life through Homer, right? The
Homeric poems, right? There, there are all these interesting
ways to think about uh one's immediate circumstances when
you move beyond the immediate circumstances. This is why
we developed the novel. This is why, right? Like
short stories become an important uh uh form of
storytelling. Um You know, this is why we love
television shows, this is why we love the movies.
Um And, and again, like that, that I think
helps explain a lot about the the internet, right?
But of course, it moves to a participatory more
mode when we get to the the internet era.
Um
So exploring this and this is also something that
you talk about in your book also connects to
questions surrounding how we relate to reality itself, right?
So why does exploring such a question matter in
this particular context?
Yeah. So a, a major thing I had to
consider in this project um was the nature of
reality itself. Um A lot of people when discussing
fake things on the internet, sort of, uh matter
of fact, they say, oh, reality, you know, is
uh what really happens. Um And everything else then
is fake. Um But that's not a great way
to explain the situation. Um BECAUSE reality is really
what we experience, right? And that, of course, could
be things that exist beyond the physical world, uh
for instance, uh your imagination, right? Um The I,
you know, you, you experience it right? As part
of your reality. Um But the the projections in
your mind are not, you know, what is in
front of you in the physical world. Uh Dreams
are a part of that, right? Uh You know,
all these interesting things, um fiction, right? When we're
reading a novel, right? It's like the imagery is
in our mind, right? Um You know, our imagination
is facilitating that. Um EVEN when we watched, you
know, television shows, movies, uh videos online when we
play games online, um our brain, right? Is interfacing
with that material, it becomes part of our reality.
Um, AND, and that, of course. Right. Um, uh,
MAKES this, I think a really interesting thing to
study because reality is so broad. Um, AND, and
again, you can't just sort of dismiss all these
things as being, uh, outright fakes, not being any
part of, uh, uh, one's experience because they are,
right, all these things are. Um, SO in the
book, when I was reading it, I had to
be very careful sort of saying like there is,
you know, sort of this virtual space, the internet
and then there's a virtual reality there. And there's
also right, this physical space in the physical world
that we exist in and there's a physical reality
there, but they're both different instantiation of reality.
Sure. So getting into the internet itself, do we
know how old the history of fake things on
the internet is? I mean, are they as old
as the internet itself or are they a little
bit more recent than that?
Yeah. In fact, it, from my, my research, I
mean, as soon as um you know, you get
these innovations in um uh multi user networks, multiuser
operating systems, um digital spaces where uh people are
interacting, the fake stuff appears right away. Um And
given what I just said, this is hardly surprising
because again, we love to tell stories. I think
what's interesting about these digital technologies is that they're
great communications mediums, right? They, they better facilitate the
transfer of information and some of that information, of
course, it's fictional. Um AND a lot of enthusiasts
like, um you know, in this period, you know,
as we're talking about like the sixties, the seventies,
the eighties, like, they really want the internet, they
want to build the internet for that purpose specifically,
right? It's like the creative technologies that they're really
interested in. It's the, the social technologies that they're
really interested in. It's like making connections to other
people. Um And there's a really rich history there
in terms of the thinking, right, the philosophy behind
this, um a lot of engineers are really cited
about the media theories of Marshall mcluhan. Uh So
mcluhan is a really important uh mass communications scholar
at the University of Toronto in the fifties, sixties
and seventies. Um And what's interesting, he's, he's kind
of remembered as being like a key piece of
like that counterculture era of like the sixties and
seventies. Um But he's kind of like a straight
laced, like professor but, but he, he really, I,
I think does a phenomenal job of like anticipating
uh the near future, like what is on the
horizon when it comes to information networks. Um And,
and he's really, really excited about this potential of
uniting the globe on these information networks. Um And
he makes this observation that, you know, in the
future, you'll be able to project your imagination to
other people, right? You'll be tapping your central nervous
system and moving that information to other people in
real time um and experiencing what they're experiencing even
though you have no physical contact with them. Um
You know, this, this is an idea. I think
that really again, motivates a lot of people who
are, you know, participating in that counterculture, but also
they have some sort of technical ability uh to
go off and build it, right. We have this
like really like dry narrative of how the internet
started. You know, what's the history of the internet?
Everybody's like, oh, it was, you know, the Department
of Defense in the United States creating this infrastructure,
this distributed infrastructure to withstand um you know, some
sort of Soviet nuclear first strike. Um And that
of course happened, but that wasn't, I think what
was motivating the engineers behind the scenes, you know,
that's sort of like the modus operandi, you know,
it's like, OK, like we need, we need the
funding, you know, we need, you know, some sort
of like mechanism to move this forward. Um But
deep down, right? You know, we, we wanna do
this other thing. Um And they know, of course,
right, you know, once the infrastructure is built, you're
gonna get ordinary people moving into it. It's not
just gonna be the defense uh community, the intelligence
community that's operating in this space. But what I
think is fascinating when you look at the early
instances of fake content because the internet is so
heavily populated by these uh communities, right? These like
government, you still see the, the storytelling because that
had been ingrained in military culture, you get like
people writing stories about UFO S strange lights in
the sky, all this stuff that was sort of
embedded into the aerospace and uh industry because that
was already part of that culture, right? Um So
this is kind of like a universal phenomenon and
that's exactly how mcluhan sort of uh describes it
uh back in the sixties, which is pretty interesting.
And does the internet introduce a new ways of
people faking things? I mean, ways that didn't exist
before?
Yeah, so, absolutely. Um E especially as you get
into like the eighties, the nineties, the two thousands,
you start to see new uh creative technologies uh
become available to the ordinary person. Um I think
it's fascinating, the book I look at the early
history of Photoshop. So that is again, like a
piece of software we're all familiar with, right? Um
It has stood the test of time. Uh It
was created in the 19 eighties which is just
uh you know, crazy to think about today, right?
Because if you think it is like a very
modern piece of software with all these great features,
of course, Adobe has been adding to that feature
set over the decades. Um But it was pretty
sophisticated right off the bat. Um And it was
created by two brothers who were really interested in
photography. They had um this vision again of um
digital spaces where ordinary people were gonna be able
to play around with uh photo photography uh in
a way that only dark room technicians, professional photographers
had been able to do up until that point.
Um So this is again another sort of forward
looking technology. Um I when you have the.com boom
of the nineties, um a lot of people who
had no experience with computers kind of get drawn
into these new social technologies, you know, they're, they're
signing on to the internet for the first time.
Um A lot of technologies um that we sort
of take for granted now, like email were kind
of novel back then. Uh And they become again
this mechanism for storytelling um before their social media.
And then finally, when you get to the, the
early two thousands, right? You have um uh what
something that, that sort of looks like, you know,
mcluhan's global village and that the whole world is
connected on these platforms and everybody is telling stories,
right? Um You see this like massive uh influx
again of, of media that is uh created from
the bottom up, right? Um It's coming from these
amateur communities, but it's making use of these new
tools, right? Um That are being put out. Uh
So people again can sort of project their imaginations
into the space and that, you know, continues to
the present day when we have uh these generative
A I systems, right? Which are kind of like
the, the next generation of the same idea.
And do we have any idea at all? How
much of the internet is fake?
That that's a really good question. I don't think
anybody has a perfect handle on that. I know
some folks have attempted to figure this out. Uh
For instance, I know uh New York magazine a
few years ago, uh put out a piece where
they tried to quantify this and I, I feel
like, you know, even their quantification of this is
kind of loosey goosey. Um They did make some
good insights though. Um They, they noted that um
it is highly likely that the majority of traffic
on social media platforms is bot driven. Um And
again, I, I think if you, you're just sort
of like a user of social media, you sort
of know this. Uh YOU know, number one, there's
a lot of concern about like algorithmic feeds and
algorithmic content. Um But there are even dumb bots
that have been around now for decades. Um So
these are like, you know, automated pieces of code
that, you know, have an ability to generate content.
Uh Mainly an ability to comment right now. This
is like an early problem when social media appeared.
And even before social media, when you had, you
know, like forums and like comment sections on news
sites um you'd get these kind of like spammy
uh troll posts, right? Um Some of it was
just advertising, in fact, a great deal of it
was advertising. Um SOME of it though, like was
appearing in a political context, right? You'd have bots
that were, you know, uh designed to uh send
messages of a politic uh certain political orientation and
automatically respond to certain keywords uh that were identified
on these feeds. Um And that just generates a
lot of noise on social media. This is like
something I think like everybody sort of agrees is
bad, it's not good. Um Even if you agree
with the message of the bot, you know, you
sort of know that it's, it's just a spay
automated message. Um um And that, you know, I,
I think is like more or less like uninteresting,
right? Um uh When we think about fake messages.
But I, I think again, there's, there's entire other
genres of fake content on there that are just
massive, right? Like, think like fandoms on the internet.
Um You know, again, this is like a mode
of storytelling, it's fictional. Um But you have these
massive communities, you know, of fans of different media
franchises, you know, like, think like Star Wars uh
different anime series, um all these different things, right?
Uh WHERE people are just writing their own stories
and, and sending them around uh meme culture is,
is just so important to the internet, these days,
right? And it keeps evolving, which I think is
fascinating. Um If you look at meme culture now,
it's, it's very much like video driven on Instagram
and tiktok. Um And, and people again are like
riffing on these ideas, remixing content. Um A lot
of that is fake, right? You know, a lot
of that again is like taking a specific fictional
trope and reworking it over time. Um And, and
again, that's the content that people love, that's the
content that people are experiencing it. Um You can
think about too, like um augmented reality, virtual reality,
right? These are, these are things, again, they're not
like the physical world, right? You know, they're, they're
sort of these artificial creations. Um But they're very
popular. Um And you could throw in like, you
know, gaming communities into that too, right? And this
blows up just so massively. Um And again, I'd
say, like most of these things, like, are pretty
positive, not the bots, but, you know, like a
lot of these other things that are participatory people
really enjoy. Um I, I think once you move
out of the realm of uh partisan politics, um
A lot of the fake stuff is, is quite
interesting. Um Because again, it's, it's, it's like creative
fiction uh versus like destructive political content.
So earlier, you've talked a little bit about photo
editing and I would like to ask you and
perhaps we can expand this also to other kinds
of uh fakes or ways that people fake things
on the internet. Do we know what goals people
have when they alter a photo, when they edit
a photo and they put a fakery up on
the internet?
Yeah. OK. So this is a really interesting question
one I looked at in depth in the book.
Um BECAUSE again, as I mentioned earlier, this, this
whole project started with my experience with um uh
media forensics, right? So there was an assumption in
that community that like people who do this are
doing something bad, right? They're trying to revise history
and they're trying to create some kind of like
perfect fake, right? That will allow them to revise
the historical record. Um It turns out historically that
doesn't really work, right? We do, we don't really
have many uh instances where like a perfect fake
has really resonated um in, in many cases, again,
even when that, that sort of happened, it was
debunked very quickly. Um And part of the reason
there, which I think is fascinating, like there's a
long history of this kind of photographic manipulation. And
again, we we we sort of tie it to
like authoritarian and totalitarian governments in the 20th century
in the, in the the era of film photography.
Um And, and there was this like pervasive idea
in the like sort of national security community here
in the United States that this was happening in
these other places, right. So we're thinking like the
Soviet Union, uh Maoist China, the Third Reich um
Fascist Italy, right? Um They, they, they, they produced
a lot of edited photographic content. Uh And of
course, in many cases, right, when they were doing
that, there was a malicious intent. Uh But what's
sort of interesting when you go back to those
old photographs, um they're not really perfect fakes, in
fact, some of them are pretty bad. Um And
that's kind of puzzling because if you look at
the history of photographic manipulation in the era of
film photography, it was quite possible to produce very
realistic fakes. Uh FOR instance, right, you could remove
somebody from a photograph and you could replace them
with somebody else and make it look pretty good.
Um But what I found looking at these old
cases, like they were like, obviously edited, right? Like
huge gaps in, in photographs of, you know, political
leaders, um you know, gaps that could have been
filled in. Um One particularly striking example I found
um from Albania, um sensors had removed um some,
some sort of men in a, a group photograph,
but they left the shoes, right? So it's like,
that's like terrifying when you're looking at this photograph
where it's like these people were removed, right? You
know, they're missing these, the shoes are still there.
Um In many cases. Um II I think a
more correct interpretation of the style of editing is
that um it's meant to send an intentional signal
to the observer. Like we can erase people, if
you mess up, we can erase you too, right?
Um What's also fascinating too is like the originals
uh tend to like persist, right? It's, it's like,
again, like the sensors remove uh you know, somebody
from a photo like they, they, they have this
revised image, but history continues to record the original.
It's like we always have these like side by
side comparisons, which is kind of interesting. Um And
when you sort of think about that, you know,
it's like, OK, maybe it's like those like obvious
fakes, right? That are the most dangerous because the
message is very clear, right? Those perfect fakes really
haven't worked. Um And so again, I think that
whole sort of assumption that again, there are bad
people out there trying to revise history. This is
not, that's not really the way this works, right?
And that's not really how it it becomes effective.
Um I, I think again, more explicit messaging uh
tends to resonate um better. And it's funny too
when you look again at the history of this,
like uh again, looking back at say like the
Soviet Union, there's like an entire genre of like
Soviet era humor about how the government lies to
you, right? It's like people did not believe the
official media record, right? Because it was always altered.
Um That, that was not surprising to, to people
who lived in the Soviet Union. Um, BUT again,
here in the, the west, again, there was this,
like, pervasive fear that, like, there was totalitarian control
over the media. Uh, BUT it didn't quite work
like that in practice. Um, WHICH is interesting. Um,
AND then if you go back further in history,
like looking at the history of film, photography itself,
um, photos are being edited right away. Right. I,
there's this myth and that sort of propagated over
to um the the area of media, forensics that
um photographs could be trusted in the past, right?
We could trust them uh because we didn't have
Photoshop, right? It wasn't, it wasn't possible, right? Many
people sort of believe to edit photographs that was
not true at all. Basically, as soon as the
camera is invented in the 19th century, photographers are
faking their photographs. Um The first fake photograph appears
in 1840 is produced by one of the inventors
of an early camera process and it just kind
of spirals from there. Um But it's mostly used
um in a, in a sort of like commercial
or creative way. Uh FOR instance, right, when you'd
sit for a portrait uh in a, in a
studio in like the 19th century, um you could
often like order some special effects, like some of
these effects again, would just make the photo look
better. Like what we do now with like photo
editing apps on our phones. Uh LOW pass filter,
right? You know, it's like we can like apply,
right, some smoothing on the face like through our
app. Uh And our complexion looks better. You could
do that uh using um some basic techniques uh
in the dark room, right? That was well known
by photographers. Um You could add objects into scenes,
you could remove objects. Um YOU could uh add
all sorts of interesting special effects, right? Which I
think it's sort of been forgotten by a lot
of people, uh even photographers. Um But, but again,
this was like all very much standard uh in
the era of film photography. So, right, like this
idea that um the photograph was like a trusted
object, I I feel was a, was a myth.
Uh That's a myth that persists to this day,
which is interesting uh from a community again, that,
that seems uh uh very keen on policing, right?
Uh FALSEHOODS.
But because people particularly nowadays are very worried about
misinformation and on the internet specifically, I have to
ask you this question. So you've already sort of
alluded to the answer, I guess in my previous
question. But are there many people who actually fall
for fake reason on the internet? I mean, whether
it's photos, videos or other kinds of content or
are people usually, or it's usually easy for people
to figure out or find out that they're fakes?
Yeah. So this, this is the question everybody seems
to want an answer to. And again, this is
like, it's difficult because like, we just don't know
and, and I'll explain why this is really difficult
even if you were gonna like, interview people, like,
why this is really difficult to answer. Um So
I think yes people of course do fall for
uh the, these things I think where you see
most people being legitimately duped, um, cases like that
are just, just, um, scams, like like criminal scams.
Uh Right? For instance, right? It's like someone who's
trying to like get money from you, right? So
they're creating a bunch of fake media to perhaps
like impersonate your relative. Um There's a lot of
concern about um voice synthesis techniques are targeting the
elderly, right? All sorts of like phone scams. Um
YOU know, somebody Impersonating a relative trying to extract
money out of somebody who probably like, isn't cognitively
all there because they're very old. Um Like, I,
I feel like those scams are becoming more prevalent
and they're working, which is very troubling what I
think does not work um As much as people
think it works like the political disinformation. Um Now
again, this may seem surprising because a lot of
people are like, well, you know, it's like my
crazy uncle like believes, right? All of this stuff,
right? Which is obviously fake. What I think is
going on in the realm of politics um is
something akin to uh professional wrestling. Do, do you
know, like the fake, the fake wrestling, right? But
yeah, so this is, this is a really interesting
effect where, you know, like professional wrestling is entertainment,
right? The the matches are, are staged, right? There
are writers who create the characters. What I think
is really interesting. This is like a fandom where
like people strongly identify with the characters and when,
when fans are talking about these wrestling matches, they're
talking about them as if they were real. Um
BUT detail, they don't, they, they know it's fake,
right? They know it's entertainment. Um And, and you
see these circumstances, you know, it's like everybody knows
it's fake and like people very pedantic people will
like, you know, confront professional wrestling fans and be
like, you know, that's fake, right? That's fake wrestling
and, and eventually the fans will be like, yeah,
we know, you know, but that's not the point,
right? It's like we identify with the fandom. I,
I think you say the same thing in partisan
politics where people identify so strongly with a political
party that they talk about these things as if
they were real, right? Like the sort of political
mythology and you see this, like regardless of political
orientation. Um And so even though they know that
this, they're talking about things that didn't actually happen
in the physical world, they still strongly identify with
the stories. Uh And so they're probably not going
to concede that they're fake, right? Um AND that,
that's a complicated thing to unpack but it's like
a well known phenomenon, uh, in the realms of,
like, anthropology, sociology, et cetera. Um, AND in fact,
anthropologists say, like, it's sort of like when people
are, like, like, like lying to you in that
manner, it's really interesting. Right. Um, BECAUSE it's saying
something about the, the culture they're embedded in. Um,
AND so you see a lot of that on
the internet, right? It's not just politics, it's other
things too. Like I see like any fandom, right?
Like you, you have people talking about, uh these
things, right? There's people on the internet, they're like,
you know, it's like I'm a Jedi Knight, right?
I identify right with this, this fictional, like religion
from like George Lucas's Mind. Um, IT'S, it's the
same type of effect, um which I think is
really fascinating. And so again, if you want to
quantify this, I, you know, I don't have no
idea because again, a lot of people that will
be telling you stories as you're trying to gauge
this, um, you may be, um unjustly saying they've
been duped in some horrible way, right? When, in
fact, they have not been duped, right? Um They
sort of know what's going on. Um, THEY'RE just
thinking in a different mode when they're responding to
the question.
Uh But when it comes to the politics itself,
uh just to make this point clear, are you
saying there that it might be the case that
at least in some specific circumstances or situations, people
might say that they believe fake things that the
for example, they preferred party claims or preferred politician
claims just to signal just to signal their group
membership. But then deep down they actually do not
believe them.
Yeah, that's, that's a good and concise way to
describe this, right? So it's in group signaling, um
which is interesting that that's not to say that
like nobody is duped. Uh In fact, like I
worry about the people that actually are duped, right?
Especially if the political rhetoric is violent in some
way. Um That's a big problem. Like I look
at the ethics of that at the end of
my book. Um BECAUSE again, I feel like this
is an issue and on the internet, uh uh
people are tend to be uh reluctant to correct,
right? These misunderstandings because you get a lot of
trolling behavior as well. Um Which is a huge
problem. Um In fact, I think a lot of
the trolling too, sort of stems out of this
effect, right? Because if you have a group, an
out group that sort of believes that you believe
these things, you may troll them quite heavily by
saying even more ridiculous things uh and claiming to
believe them uh right, that, that sort of keeps
you in the news, right? That keeps the the
arguments going, it brings more attention to your movement
et cetera.
And do we know if there are many people
on the internet that actually create fake content? Because
I mean, I've had on the show people that
work specifically on misinformation on the internet and most
of them tell me that when you look at
it, it's actually a very small number of people
that, for example, put out political misinformation on the
internet. Uh But then because, uh I mean, many
times it's outrageous, then it garners a lot of
attention, but it's actually a tiny number of people
doing it and then many more people consuming it.
But the ones who create it are not that
many.
Yeah. So if, but so I would argue against
this because if you take my more expansive view
of the internet and all of the participatory, right?
Uh MEDIA generation, uh the use of tools like
Photoshop, the use of uh uh generative A I
mid journey dolly, right? All these systems, all the
content flooding uh people using, you know, uh facial
filtering apps, right? Like all of this is generating
quote unquote fake content, right? So that's basically all
of us, right? We're all doing it. Um Think
about how many people are creating their own memes,
right? This is a staggering number of people, the
people involved in these fandoms, right? This is like
many millions of people. Um YOU know, again, there
there's a human inclination to tell stories, right? That's
something really fundamental about our humanity. Um I, I
think again, if you're describing this in this very
niche way, right? We, we were just like, you
know, explicit political disinformation. Yeah, that there probably is
a really small number of people. Um But, but
this phenomenon is much broader, right? Um And, and
again, I think there's a lot of these things
get entangled too. Um One thing I like to
think a lot about um parody and satire on
the internet, especially political parody and satire. Um Some
stuff looks like disinformation, but it's actually making a
completely different political point, right? Uh If you stopped
at the surface level message of the content, uh
you're completely missing the point. Uh And a lot
of meme culture, especially like political meme culture works
that way. Um But, but again, this is kind
of part of the motivation for this book, right?
I I just kept seeing a lot of commentators
like stopping at the surface level. Um And you
just miss so much of the interesting stuff when
you do that.
So let me ask you now about video specifically
because in more recent times we have uh deep
fakes, we have a I generated video content and
all of that. Uh And sometimes, I mean, people
get into lots of trouble because particularly when it
comes to deep fake porn, they can actually create,
generate videos where they put a particular person. It's
usually women, unfortunately, uh in a porn video and
sometimes it can be very, very damaging to their
social reputation. So, do you think that's uh perhaps
something that we should worry more about because it's
a little bit more sophisticated or not?
Yeah. In fact, I would argue this is like
a primary concern when we think about fake content,
especially deep fakes, like the history of deep fakes
um is troubling, right? So again, this is something
we hear about a lot. Uh ALMOST always in
a political context though there has been uh growing
reporting on the specific uh instance which you mentioned,
right, which is the creation of deep fake pornography.
It turns out um the deep fakes algorithm was
created specifically for that. Um WHEN, when it first
hits the internet, right? It's sort of being billed
as a way to create your like fantasy porn,
right? You can take some actress' face and, and
again, it's always like in a sort of female
context which I think is, is incredibly misogynistic. Um
And, and, you know, it's like you can create,
you know, some scene using, you know, some existing
pornography. Um AND this becomes quite popular. Uh THEN
along the way, um it became a mechanism for
uh re creating revenge porn, right? It's like, oh
you don't actually have to film a real scene.
Um YOU can take your ex's face right and
post it into porn. Uh AND even more troubling
now, it's like middle school students are like bullying
other students using this right? Trying to humiliate them.
I I think all of this is appalling. I
I think this is like one specific scenario where
deep fakes are highly effective and this is related
to my earlier point about obvious fakes being more
effective than perfect fakes, like even a bad deep
fake, right? That is obviously fake can humiliate somebody,
right? Like that's just like devastating, right? If you're
like, you know, an eighth grade girl and all
of the boys in your school, right? Are circulating
these fake porn videos, right? That are obviously fake,
right? I I think this is, this is terrible,
this is a serious social problem. Um I I
think it's endemic too of like this broader porn
culture which I find appalling uh on the internet.
But again, a lot of that involves fake content.
Um COMING back to the politics of deep fakes
though those almost never work, right? I I feel
like, you know, we talk a lot about them.
There hasn't really been an instance that you can
sort of definitively say this deep fake swayed an
election, right? This deep fake had a serious political
implication. Um THEY almost always appear posted by anonymous
accounts, right? That are not any maj major news
source. Uh THEY are almost immediately debunked right away
because again, they, they depict public figures, especially politicians
who have public, you know, uh schedules. They are,
they are scrutinized by the media minute by minute.
Right. They're, they're constantly, like, you know, like press
pools following these people. Uh, AND so it just
doesn't work. Right. You know, and, and again, like,
I think people now sort of are savvy. Right.
They're like, wait a minute, you know, this, this
sensational video I'm looking at of this politician. If
this were real, I probably would have heard about
it, uh, from a paper of record, right. FROM
a major, you know, uh news source. Um AND
instead nobody's talking about this, right? It's just circulating
on social media.
And what about shock content websites? I mean, I
remember back in the mid two thousands when I
was an adolescent that we were all the time
looking at that kind of content. I mean, I
mean, at a certain point, it was almost like
a rite of passage, particularly for boys that we
really had to expose ourselves to that those kinds
of websites. So why are they so popular?
Yeah, I think this is another important piece of
the history of fake content on the internet. Um
VERY early in this sort of, you know, like.com
era, like shocking material was starting to gain an
audience. Um There was one website in particular uh
rotten.com which I think is really fascinating. It was
definitely like a very popular website, like looking back
actually, it's kind of shocking, like it was so
popular. Um It, it got a lot of mainstream
attention. Um uh BECAUSE it received so much traffic
and it was routinely like posting content. Um THAT
was like irresistible. You couldn't not look, right? Um
Like a big early win for that site was
um uh a picture that um allegedly depicted um
the the fatal crash that killed Princess Diana, right?
So this is like an internet form of rubber
necking on the road, right? It was like an
accident. Uh And again, that was such a major
news story, like the whole world is paying attention
and then all of a sudden it's like, oh,
look, the photo is on the internet. Um Now
what's interesting about that photo is it was, it
was completely fake. It, it didn't, it didn't uh
depict the the accident at all. Uh The French
government was chiming in saying, you know, this, this
does not match, you know, any sort of uh
uh emergency responder vehicle type that we have in
France. Um But people kept looking, right? Um WHICH
is really, really interesting. Um And the site again
just would find odd things. Some of it was
real, some of it wasn't um it was really
sort of an internet version of, you know, PT
Barnum's Museum, right? This sort of like Sideshow uh
type of entertainment, which was very popular uh in
America uh for many decades. Um And I think
it is more along the lines of um storytelling,
right? Again, like, like, like uh cultural commentary through,
right? Um These, these uh stories versus something that
was really malicious, right? Like a form of disinformation.
Um Again, I, I feel like the site like
is very much like situated, you know, in this,
this longer tradition of storytelling, um which again is
really, really interesting. Um And it remains popular for
many years. It's not until really social media becomes
dominant in terms of like where people are going,
that the site kind of fades away. Um It
was very much like a piece of like the
the.com boom that sort of like lives on uh
right up until the point where social media uh
takes off. Um And again, a lot of it
was just again, like, it left people guessing, which
I think was like the most intriguing part of
the site, you know, it's like this could be
real, right? Like there's something here, right? Like maybe
just, maybe, no, it's real. Um And the creator
of the site again, was really good at creating
sort of ambiguous, like descriptions of things, like describing
things in ambiguous terms that always left people guessing,
uh which I think is really interesting. Um So
again, a lot of people were like, horrified by
the site, there was a lot of terrible stuff
on there. Uh But again, more along the lines
of like a sideshow attraction and not really like
political, right? Or, or, or sort of malicious in
any way. Um WHICH again, like in, in context,
I think uh makes sense.
And in what ways do computer hackers relate to
fake things on the internet? I mean, what's the
relationship here?
Yeah. So hackers were behind the scenes for a
lot of these things we've been talking about, for
instance, uh rotten.com uh was created by somebody uh
who was uh around the hacker scene, right? A
hacker who went by the handle soil. Uh HE
was an early text file writer. Um And so,
so text files are like these like short little
stories. Um Sometimes they were technical, sometimes they were,
and sometimes they blended storytelling and technical content. It
was like, it was a very low bandwidth era
even up through like the early two thousands, right?
A lot of people didn't have uh broadband of
any sort, right? Wi Fi wasn't really a thing.
Uh And so hackers find like really interesting ways
to communicate, like in these low bandwidth uh uh
uh mechanisms. Um And what's interesting about computer hacking
and we, we kind of stereotype it, you know,
oh, like these are like lone individuals, like in
a base breaking into systems doing these malicious things.
Um And that's not really the way the subculture
worked. Number one, it was a subculture. Uh IT
was very social. Um It was very creative. Uh
IT was more about um the creative use of
technology or sort of like using technology in unanticipated
ways, you know, the designer created this product. Um
But you sort of hacked it to figure out,
oh, like I can enable like these features, the
creator never really intended uh by putting these things
together, adding things, right, removing things. Um And there's
like this long history of, of, of people operating
in this mode. Um And so the the computer
hackers of like the sort of like eighties, nineties
and two thousands are, are doing that. But using
social technologies, um they're obsessed with early computer networking,
like bulletin board systems, again, allows them to connect
to other people uh who are thinking similar things.
Um And what's fascinating about this text file culture
that develops in parallel to this? Um There's just
a tremendous amount of fake stuff, right? Because again,
like these, they storytelling, right? Writing little stories, um
they're trying to build a proper subculture, right? That
usually means you need some foundational myths. Um So
hackers, like, you know, we're talking about these fantastic
like escapades, some, some of them blending some, some
real, you know, uh information, right? It's like people
were actively breaking into computer systems. Um But sometimes
talking about things they found there that did not
exist, right? Um UFO material, for instance, right? All
these interesting uh things that would make these text
files uh just so irresistible to newcomers, right? Uh
TO the subculture. Um AND hackers are really good
too at identifying flaws and systems, right? So they're
thinking about this media ecosystem that is evolving quite
rapidly, right? Especially when you get into the.com era
of the nineties, they're thinking about disinformation. You know,
it's like if you weren't like, sort of virtuous,
right? Most hackers were, um what ways could you
exploit the media, right? Uh TO social engineer people
uh in dangerous ways. Um You know, they're, they're
thinking about the media very broadly, which I think
is really interesting. Uh A lot of the hackers
I talked to were quite media savvy. Um uh
A lot of the, the material they were producing
decades ago, resonates, I think uh today because they
really anticipate where all this was going. Um This
sort of, again, like, like Marshall mcluhan, I mentioned
earlier, like have a really strong sense of the
trajectory of the technology and how people will use
it socially. Um And again, it's something I think
a lot of people don't give hackers credit for.
Um AGAIN, a community that, that just love the
internet still loves the internet. Um But the writing
was on the wall in terms of where a
lot of these things were going for them. Um
And again, they were trying to send out warnings
signs uh in some cases, but uh a a
lot of people were ignoring it or just didn't
think it would ever sort of come to fruition
and talking about the media more generally. How do
you look at the relationship or dynamic between traditional
media and the internet and new or alternative media
in this particular context of fake things.
Yeah. So I, I'll point out again, like there,
there are a lot of assumptions we make about
the traditional media versus um the, the internet today,
these digital mediums that we use for communication. Um
Fake news was always a problem. Um In, in
my book, I look at um cases of this.
Um uh AGAIN, journalists have a habit of sensationalizing
stories that is nothing new. Um There, there are
strategies you can use if you're being interviewed, I'm
not doing this here. But when you interviewed to
like inject, you know, information that, you know, the
reporter is going to report on, uh because there
is such a good hook there. Um A lot
of traditional media is a business and of course,
you need to sell product. Um And so again,
a lot of sensational reporting becomes problematic. Um Again,
that's nothing new. Um I think what, what is
new um the participatory nature, right? Because again, there's
a lot of gatekeeping in traditional media. Um You
know, you have to like, you know, go through
a process to become a professional reporter, right? You
know, there's a lot of training, right? You need
credentials. Um IF you're gonna like work in prestige
uh media, right? Like you have to be elite,
right? Um You have to like go to the
right schools know the right people um you know,
be a really good writer, all these different things.
Um You can avoid all of that gatekeeping if
you just publish your own stuff online, right? You
can become a youtuber, right? Say whatever you want,
right? You can like create tiktoks and say whatever
you want. Um So you have this divide now
between like a very elite, like, you know, like
um media, right? Like that is sort of like
pushing content top down. Um And then everybody on
the internet, right, creating their own media and it's
coming from the bottom up. Um I think that's
a huge change uh in the media, right? Because
that really didn't exist until very recently with these
tech, these digital technologies, right? With computer networking. Um
THAT again, that's not to say that 11 way
is better than the other. I think there are
advantages to both, right? Um A lot of that
gatekeeping, you know, uh if you have uh really
honest journalists, right, that are really scrutinizing their, their
sources uh that are trying to envoi of sensationalism,
right? Like you're gonna get really good coverage of
a topic um that said um sometimes, right, like
the wisdom of the crowd is valuable, right? I
know sometimes public sentiment uh uh is telling you
something different than what the reporters are telling you,
right? And that could be really important. Um But
there's a lot again of storytelling on, on both
sides, um which makes it complicated
and what does A I add to the picture
here when it comes to fake things on the
internet. You know, I have to ask you this
because people are obsessed with A I now because
of open A I chat GP T. So all
of that. So,
so again, I'm a computer scientist so I, I
try to take a reasonable view of this. Um
II, I, I'm not freaking out about this at
all. Um I, I don't think this is like
an incredible revolution that appeared suddenly uh again, a
lot of that is sensational reporting around this and
also um the pr operations of these companies that
are producing these products, like working in overdrive to
promote these sensational uh takes on the technology. I
do think it's really important. I think it's interesting
though in the book, I look at it in
context. Um THERE is a long history uh behind
things like generative A I um that again is
largely being ignored. Um uh WHICH uh you know,
part of that I think is, is there's a
lot of complicated technical material, right that you have
to sort of sift through. Um But the idea
of synthesizing content um goes back decades. Um There
was a lot of work on it. Um It
was just really hard to do in a practical
sense because you didn't have the internet in like
the 19 sixties. I'm sure you had really good
um uh probabilistic generative models operating in a Bayesian
context, et cetera. But that was like all math,
you know, on the chalkboard, um you didn't have
uh graphical processing units, right? These like supercomputers, right,
that are packaged up for our home computers, um
which is really difficult to do, right? So again,
you see this inflection point more recently where like
got a ton of data on the internet, you
also have these GP US, you can put these
things together and all of a sudden, right? Um
THESE older ideas become uh quite useful. Um And
I think the way people are using these things
is actually mostly good. Um Again, coming back to
a lot of these like fandoms I've been talking
about, you know, there are all sorts of interesting
uh generative models that can like recast content in
the style of whatever you love. Um There are
a lot of people, people creating digital art. Um
YOU know, there's, there's an entire new sort of
opening for artists like, you know, in this, this
digital space, uh a lot of uh a lot
of creativity, uh A lot of people like, like
doing really interesting installations, right? Using combinations of like,
you know, um uh uh observer interaction with a
generative A I system to change, you know, the
sort of experience from, from person to person. Um
All of this is really great. Um Now, of
course, again, there, there is a lot of hysteria
over this as well. Right. It was like, oh,
no chat GP. T, right. It's gonna, you know,
end education as we know it because all students
will cheat as, as an educator. I, I think
that's like a ludicrous proposition because you really have
like, no faith yourself as an educator. You have
no, you have no trust in your students and
they're always gonna be cheaters. Um. Right. I think
there's like some baseline of cheating that, like doesn't
fluctuate very much and like the cheaters are just
going to adopt new tools. Uh And then you
have a lot of students that actually want to
learn, right? Um And they're not going to use
it that way. Um I, yeah, I, I think,
I think this is kind of silly. Um And
the other thing too is like, these systems again,
are not, they're not quite human like either. Um
You know, especially with like image and video synthesis
is often very easy to see that, you know,
oh, this is like an image that's come from
one of these systems. In fact, I can almost
tell now I've looked at so many, you know,
like, like mid journey dolly images. I can, I
can sort of like fingerprint the system just by
looking at the image where it's like, oh, like
that came from mid journey, right? Like, you know,
it's like, it's not quite, I think at the
point where again, like uh uh everything is, is
is falling apart. Um And again, for all the
reasons I mentioned too, in terms of like how
people sort of vet information. II, I don't think
this is um a disaster scenario. II, I think
for the most part, these technologies are pretty interesting
and good.
So I have two more questions here. Uh The
next one is uh II, I think you've already
sort of touched on these slightly earlier. But could
you tell us about this idea of myth building?
I mean, what is myth building? And in what
ways does it relate to fake things on the
internet?
Yeah. So turning back to the field of anthropology,
um a lot of what I'm talking about here
is really well known uh e especially like uh
among scholars who study different cultures, um study, you
know, studies like trying to understand like how we
communicate, like how we, we interact as peoples. Um
The stories are really diagnostic. Um Levy Strauss, Claude
Levy Strauss. Um He's an incredibly important thinker uh
from the 20th century. I, I think he has
just an excellent handle on, on how people communicate
in general. Uh And I'm rather shocked that more
people don't talk about the internet through the lens
of Levy Strauss. So he argues that people think
in two different ways. Uh One is rational thought
and this is really in the present day, like
all we tend to think about when we think
about thinking, right? You know, it's like people are
highly rational creatures, right? We filter everything through logic.
Uh We only use observable evidence to make decisions
uh that will lead to our behaviors in the,
in the world. And when you see people thinking
things that's irrational and that's bad, right? Like we
should only think purely rationally. Um If you look
at the history of the internet, um there's actually
like uh like a prominent subculture that develops around
like this, this idea of rational thought where you
get these rationalists, uh Many of them are computer
scientists and mathematicians. Um And they have again, this,
like very specific notion of what thinking should be
and they, they just despise everything, right? That isn't
that. Um Now, rational thinking is important. Again, I'm
a computer scientist, I appreciate, right? What logic allows
us to do all these digital technologies we're talking
about are underpinned by, right, formal logic. Um But
at the same time that misses a lot of
how we think, right, on a day to day
basis for every, we started talking about, you know,
this podcast, um the imagination dreaming. Um All of
these things fit into what Levi Strauss describes as
mythical thought. Um So he argues equally important to
rational thought is mythical thought thinking beyond your immediate
circumstances through fiction. Um This is extremely important for
problem solving. He argues because you're quite limited in
terms of your immediate observations. Um If I can
think of something that doesn't exist now. Maybe I
can figure out how to build it, you know,
I can cobble together all these pieces, um, and
bring into being something fundamentally new. Um, IRONICALLY, um,
engineers, scientists, all these highly rational people do this
all of the time. Right. If they don't use
their imagination, they're kind of stuck. Right. Uh, WITH
what they have in their immediate surroundings and that's
not good. Um, SO Strauss has a sweeping sort
of view of all this, right? Um All of
the, the sort of, you know, creativity, uh all
the myths, all of the religions, right? He wraps
all of this up and he's arguing, you can't
really exist successfully uh as a person unless you
do both of these things uh in your mind.
Um And if you view the internet in that
context and it makes a lot more sense. Right?
It's like, oh, like it's not this purely rational
space. It was built out to be, right? Those
rationalist communities were completely wrong about this even earlier.
Right? There's this notion of the internet as an
information super highway. Uh Right. It'll be a database
of facts, right. You know, this is like the
marketing of the internet, you know, in the nineties,
uh, big companies love this idea. You know, it's
like we'll go there for commerce and education, it
will only be serious, right? Um And this is
gonna like, you know, propel humanity forward. Um, BUT
that's not really why people were going to the
internet, right? They realized, wait a minute, all these
interesting creative uh pieces of software exist there. All
these virtual communities are being bootstrapped. Um We love
the social aspects of it, right? That's much better
than this information Super Highway thing, which is pretty
bland uh and corporate. Um AND that really fulfills,
right? What mcluhan is talking about when he envisions
this, which is very much in the mood again
of Levy Strauss, right? These were all very popular
ideas uh in the mid 20th century. Um And
so that I think is a much better way
to think about the internet, which I think, you
know, if, if, if you were thinking about that,
like may chill you out if you're so paranoid
about uh people faking things.
And do you think that this is also something
to do with the way that we create relationships
with other people, how we relate socially? Because, I
mean, in terms of how we build a social
identity, the kinds of uh shared social identities that
we have. I mean, they are very much based
on myth building as well.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, foundational myths, right? I mean, those
are key to any sort of culture, any sort
of community. Um And, and again, they're, they're really
useful, right? Um And I think it was fascinating
going back to like antiquity, right? It's like almost
everything that is serious is like filtered through the
Homeric poems, right? Like why are people doing that?
Um It's because they can evoke, right? The, the
characters from those poems to express like certain sentiments,
right? Certain political ideas is, and it would put
everybody on a common basis, right? Everybody was speaking
that language. Um THAT hasn't changed. Right. Again, you
see lots of different communities doing this. Um We
do this in politics today, right? We do this
like, you know, in all these different subcultures we've
been talking about. Um AND all that is actually
good, right? That's important. Um That's always been a
piece of human communication.
So my last question then how much of a
problem do you think fake things on the internet
are actually?
Yeah, I I don't, as I've been saying, I
don't think it's the existential problem people are describing
it as um I think that is pretty silly.
That is an overgeneralization and in some sense, something
that is fake. Um That said we did talk
about some legitimate social problems we should be very
concerned about. Um Like, I don't think it's great
that middle schoolers are creating fake porn, right? That's
really bad. We should do something about that. Um
II I don't think great like trolling, right? That's
like bullying people online, right? Like and humiliating them
using right? Targeted fake content is good. Um I
don't think it's good that elderly people are being
targeted by scams using synthetic voice tracks of the
relatives. Um These are, these are the real problems
I think we should be focused on. Um And
again, like thinking about how we want to use
this technology. Well, um I think if we backed
off the hysteria related to partisan politics, right, we
could more effectively respond to these problems and probably
be ha happier, healthier and enjoy the internet a
bit more
great. So the book is again a history of
fake things on the internet. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
doctor Ser, apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Yeah, absolutely. Um So I'm easy to find, I'm
a professor at the University of Notre Dame. Um
If you just Google my name or use any
of the many now generative A I search tools,
uh you can find my website but um if
you want to shortcut, it's just uh WJ shire.com.
Uh I'm also uh on X slash Twitter. Um
It's just my name is my handle. You can
easily find me there. Um Feel free again to
shoot me a message. Um If you're interested uh
in continuing the dialogue here.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been really
fun to talk with you.
Excellent. Thank you Ricardo. This is a great conversation.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitten
bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger K and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K. Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S
friends, David Sloan Wilson, ya dear, Roman Roach Diego
and Jan Punter Romani Charlotte. Bli Nico Barba, Adam
Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Na Me, Gary G Alman Sam
of Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter W
as in David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No. Week, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.